---
layout: post
title: "Is it ‘Freedom’ if one groups freedom is at the expense of another?"
date: 2015-04-13
author: Jason
categories: politics, Religious Freedom
featured: true
---
####Religious Freedom or Privilege in Indiana

Unless you’ve been living in a cave the last couple weeks, you probably are familiar with all the shenanigans happening in Indiana and their *“Restoring Religious Freedom Act”*. I am always skeptical of this kind of legislation mostly because of the name—it seems these kinds of laws are really about privilege, and not freedom per se. These laws make me wonder if ‘Religious Freedom’ is under attack in Indiana, or the country for that matter? My gut says no (I am sure Fundamentalist Christians would disagree) and I am guessing in these cases it is more a response to eroding privilege than encroaching persecution.


###Excerpts from the Law
Proponents of this law, do not want to be coerced (mainly by the government) into an action that contradicts their religious beliefs as Section 8(a) states: “Except as provided in subsection (b), a governmental entity may not substantially burden a person's exercise of religion, even if the burden results from a rule of general applicability.”  Section 8(b) puts the burden of proof on the governmental entity: “A governmental entity may substantially burden a person's exercise of religion only if the governmental entity demonstrates that application of the burden to the person: (1) is in furtherance of a compelling governmental interest; and (2) is the least restrictive means of furthering that compelling governmental interest.” Section(9) says that anyone who feels their religious liberty has been violated, can site this law as a defense in court. Section (10) allows awarding of damages for successful citation of this law in proving their religious liberty violated. See the [full text] (https://iga.in.gov/legislative/2015/bills/senate/101#digest-heading) of the law.

###Citing Biblical Law as if it trumps our secular law
Some proponents of this law site their dedication to Christian biblical law as justification for the need for this legislation. The problem is biblical law is not the law of the land (nor should it be, or any religious ‘law’ for that matter) in this country. Why should a certain group have a different set of rules than the rest of us? That sounds like privilege to me, and a misconception of freedom. Freedom of religion is to protect the faithful from a government that would make it illegal to practice any religion, members building a place of worship or companies discriminating against peoples of faith, etc.  Religious law does not privilege you to act in a vacuum, in spite of others who do not believe the same as you. Laws should create a religiously neutral space in the marketplace for business matters, and some social matters as well (marriage-equality, abortion for instance). Just as a religious person would be obligated to provide their good or service to a non religious person (unless they are unruly), the reverse is also required, an atheist could not discriminate against a Christian either, as that would be ‘privilege’. When it comes to the public marketplace you’re subject rules set forth by the governing body in order to sell/provide your good or service, that’s how markets (are supposed to) work.

###Marriage has two meanings
Marriage has two definitions: legal and spiritual. I am more interested in the legal definition, which according to The <a href="https://www.law.cornell.edu/wex/marriage" target="_blank" class="article-link">Legal Information Institute </a> at Cornell University is: ” The legal union of a couple as spouses.  The basic elements of a marriage are: (1) the parties' legal ability to marry each other, (2) mutual consent of the parties, and (3) a marriage contract as required by law.” People who are married enjoy some privileges over people who are not, in the eyes of the State it is a business arrangement between two people. Religious fundamentalists and zealots have been pushing legislation that protects the privileges of heterosexual couples as support for marriage equality is growing fast. The religious definition is irrelevant as far as I am concerned, as we do not follow religious law. However, since the state has granted ‘legal’ matrimony powers to religious organizations, and they sell their services because of that, they would have to be obligated to provide the marriage service to LBGT consenting adults as well as heterosexual couples in my view. In that respect those organizations are businesses providing a service in the market, and should not be granted the privilege to ignore the rules they don’t like.

</p></br>

<p class="section-headline">Freedom; It’s complicated</p>
<p> The definition of Freedom from Merriam-Webster—1. the absence of necessity, coercion, or constraint in choice or action; 2. the quality or state of being exempt or released usually from something onerous.  These 2 definitions boil down to freedom from(<a href="http:// http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Negative_liberty" target="_blank" class="article-link">negative liberty</a>), and freedom to (<a href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Positive_liberty" target="_blank" class="article-link">positive liberty</a>).  These 2 concepts were elaborated on in 1941’s  <a href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Escape_from_Freedom" target="_blank" class="article-link"> “The Fear of Freedom”</a> by <a href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Erich_Fromm" target="_blank" class="article-link" >Erich Fromm</a>. Conservatives and Liberals use these 2 concepts interchangeably for different issues. Freedom is not a black or white concept, there are many restraints to your ability to ‘do what you want’ as there should be. The goal should be to provide as much freedom as possible to individuals without compromising the freedom of others. Allowing people the freedom to practice their religion as long as it is not at the expense of others. Governments do not have a monopoly on coercion.
</p>
